MANY YEARS LATER as he faced the firing squad, Colonel Aureliano Buendía was to remember that
distant afternoon when his father took him to discover ice. At that time Macondo was a village of
twenty adobe houses, built on the bank of a river of clear water that ran along a bed of polished
stones, which were white and enormous, like prehistoric eggs. The world was so recent that many
things lacked names, and in order to indicate them it was necessary to point. Every year during the
month of March a family of ragged gypsies would set up their tents near the village, and with a great
uproar of pipes and kettledrums they would display new inventions. First they brought the magnet.
A heavy gypsy with an untamed beard and sparrow hands, who introduced himself as Melquíades,
put on a bold public demonstration of what he himself called the eighth wonder of the learned alchemists of Macedonia. 
He went from house to house dragging two metal ingots and everybody was
amazed to see pots, pans, tongs, and braziers tumble down from their places and beams creak from
the desperation of nails and screws trying to emerge, and even objects that had been lost for a long
time appeared from where they had been searched for most and went dragging along in turbulent
confusion behind Melquíades’ magical irons. “Things have a life of their own,” the gypsy proclaimed
with a harsh accent. “It’s simply a matter of waking up their souls.” José Arcadio Buendía, whose
unbridled imagination always went beyond the genius of nature and even beyond miracles and
magic, thought that it would be possible to make use of that useless invention to extract gold from
the bowels of the earth. Melquíades, who was an honest man, warned him: “It won’t work for
that.” But José Arcadio Buendía at that time did not believe in the honesty of gypsies, so he traded
his mule and a pair of goats for the two magnetized ingots. Úrsula Iguarán, his wife, who relied on
those animals to increase their poor domestic holdings, was unable to dissuade him. “Very soon well
have gold enough and more to pave the floors of the house,” her husband replied. For several
months he worked hard to demonstrate the truth of his idea. He explored every inch of the region,
even the riverbed, dragging the two iron ingots along and reciting Melquíades’ incantation aloud.
The only thing he succeeded in doing was to unearth a suit of fifteenth-century armor which had all
of its pieces soldered together with rust and inside of which there was the hollow resonance of an
enormous stone-filled gourd. When José Arcadio Buendía and the four men of his expedition
managed to take the armor apart, they found inside a calcified skeleton with a copper locket
containing a woman’s hair around its neck.
In March the gypsies returned. This time they brought a telescope and a magnifying glass the size
of a drum, which they exhibited as the latest discovery of the Jews of Amsterdam. They placed a
gypsy woman at one end of the village and set up the telescope at the entrance to the tent. For the
price of five reales, people could look into the telescope and see the gypsy woman an arm’s length
away. “Science has eliminated distance,” Melquíades proclaimed. “In a short time, man will be able
to see what is happening in any place in the world without leaving his own house.” A burning
noonday sun brought out a startling demonstration with the gigantic magnifying glass: they put a pile
of dry hay in the middle of the street and set it on fire by concentrating the sun’s rays. José Arcadio
Buendía, who had still not been consoled for the failure of big magnets, conceived the idea of using
that invention as a weapon of war. Again Melquíades tried to dissuade him, but he finally accepted
the two magnetized ingots and three colonial coins in exchange for the magnifying glass. Úrsula
wept in consternation. That money was from a chest of gold coins that her father had put together
ova an entire life of privation and that she had buried underneath her bed in hopes of a proper
occasion to make use of it. José Arcadio Buendía made no at. tempt to console her, completely
